---
layout: default
title: The Love ◦ Sex ◦ Fur Guide to Gender
---

Welcome to the **<span class="titlefont">Love ◦ Sex ◦ Fur</span> Guide
to Gender**! Our goal is to provide a simple guide to help you explore
and understand gender both inside and outside the furry fandom. We'll be
covering the topics of gender and sex, trans\* identity, the
intersection with sexuality and furry, and social interaction. This
guide will be available online in a mobile-friendly format, as well as
in print so that it's always there to be referenced.

### Gender and sex

The first and most important thing to note is that gender and sex are
separate entities. They may sometimes interact with each other, but it
is important to understand the difference between the two.

Gender commonly refers to the way one identifies. Factors such as one's
biological sex, the role one plays in society, and the ways in which one
feels about those things affect the ways in which one identifies. For
example, one can identify as primarily masculine with some feminine
traits, completely feminine, or neither masculine nor feminine.

Sex refers to a set of physical characteristics with social
implications. This is often assumed to mean genitalia, but refers to
several factors such as both primary and secondary sexual
characteristics, and how close appears to reflect the social standards
of masculinity and femininity. Sex is determined by genetics, hormone
sensitivity, and countless other physical attributes, and can be the
subject of stress and internal strife if it does not align with one's
gender identity. Sex is usually described as being assigned at birth, as
our identities are not fully formed at that point, and we have little
say in the matter when the social implications are put in place.

In the middle is expression. Expression is the way in which we influence
the ways that others perceive us, with regards to gender and sex. For
example, one can dress in such a way as to affirm their gender identity,
even if it doesn't match with their assigned sex.

### Trans\*

When someone's gender identity doesn't align with the social and
biological sex they were assigned at birth, this is termed
'transgenderism'. Transgender is an adjective, and thus describes an
aspect of someone (that is, it's more correct to refer to someone as 'a
transgender person', rather than 'a transgender'). Transgenderism is an
enormous topic, and we can't hope to cover it all here, but there are a
few things that are worth noting, and we'll see later how they tie in
with the furry fandom.

#### Dysphoria

Dysphoria is the acute sensation that one is in the wrong body or form.
In particular, gender dysphoria refers to the sensation that one's
identity does not match their physical form. For example, this can
express itself as anxiety over hair loss, distress at one's genitalia or
sexuality, or a feeling of not belonging in the form one has.

One of the ways that one can help alleviate this sense of dysphoria is
through modifying one's gender expression. One can modify the way in
which they're seen by the world around them so that they are perceived
to be as their proper gender identity. This can mean changing the way
one looks (such as adopting a new style of dress or binding one's
chest), changing the way one sounds through voice therapy, or changing
the way one interacts through social roles.

#### Witnessing and mirroring

On the topic of gender expression, there are two important psychological
concepts that can help one to feel more comfortable with their gender
identity. Witnessing is the act of being seen by outsiders as fitting in
with one's identity - it is acceptance and confirmation that one's
identity exists. Mirroring is seeing aspects of one's identity in others
- it is community and confirmation that one's identity is valid \[<span
id="deref1">[1](#ref1)</span>\].

Acceptance means a lot to people in any sort of minority group. It means
a lot to those who identify as trans\*, just as it means a lot to those
who identify as gay, lesbian, or bisexual. One thing you can do for
those around you who identify as trans\* is to accept that their
experience is valid, and to support them in any way that you can. Be
sure to talk with them and try and understand what they're going
through.

Community is also very important to minority group membership. A trans\*
person will gain just as much through their association with other
trans\* folks just as someone who identifies as a furry gains a lot by
association with other furries. If you feel that you are trans\*, have
questions about gender as it pertains to you, or are even just curious,
one thing that you can do is to help build that sense of community with
others.

#### Beyond the binary

It is easy to fall back into old habits and refer to "the other gender"
or "the other sex", but it has been increasingly important over the last
several years that we move beyond the concept of binary gender. There
isn't so much 'male and female' as a spectrum between the two. It's a
spectrum that also incorporates a second dimension of intensity. For
instance, one can feel strongly male with some weakly feminine aspects,
or strongly feminine with no male aspects, or simply like neither of
those fit at all.

The purpose of thinking beyond the binary is finding out what fits best
in terms of identity. This means that it's worth some introspection to
find out what works best for you in order to find the most happiness in
your life, and also to understand that those around you are doing much
the same. Some might find that they are comfortable as they are and
that's great, while others might feel more comfortable dressing
differently, changing the way they act, or even undergoing surgery.

Labels can work against us, here. Although it's nice to think of
'trans\*' and 'transgender' as umbrella terms that we can apply to this
whole realm of experience, it's nice to have a label that we can accept
for ourselves, or to at least have the ability to reject all labels.
Even so, we're often put on the spot to provide our labels when
interacting with others, and proving that our identity is valid can take
some work, and can take a lot out of us. There is no easy solution,
other than to be as understanding as you can be with those around you
and make sure to offer what support you can!

### The intersection with furry

Nearly *8%* of the furry fandom responded as identifying as a gender
other than their self-described biological sex \[<span
id="deref2">[2](#ref2)</span>\]. Combine that with the fact that *19.4%*
of respondents say that they role play as a character of a different sex
than their own at least some of the time, and it's easy to see why this
is pertinent within a furry context: it's something many of us are
already thinking about. Why might that be?

One reason might be that the idea of identity is already something that
we're comfortable dealing with. Furries are already primed to think
about their identity, though admittedly some of that comes in the form
of thinking about species, rather than gender, but the underlying
mechanism is similar: for many of us, there is a mismatch that we're
seeking to assuage, whether it's through putting on a fursuit or putting
on makeup. Identity, after all, is that thing which is felt when it's
out of line with reality: people who are comfortable feeling totally
human don't think about being human, just as people who are comfortable
with their assigned sex of male or female don't often think about their
identity as male or female.

Another, and possibly related, reason might be that we're already open
to the concept of affirming one's identity, and accepting of that
process in ourselves and others. We can see this going on around us all
the time, and due to some of our other demographics (the male skew of
the furry fandom leading to greater numbers of male homosexual
relationships comes to mind) leads us to being more able and willing to
accept other minority identities such as trans\*.

### The intersection with sexuality

Dysphoria, the sensation that one's identity does not match one's
physical characteristics, plays a unique role when it comes to
sexuality. Some people who experience gender dysphoria are okay with
sexual activity, whether on their own or with others, online or in
person. For others, the aversion to their assigned sex might be such
that they feel an aversion to interacting as that sex. Each person is
different in this regard, and it's worth some introspection and at least
a conversation about what that means for you and those close to you.

Furry, for many, provides a sexual outlet that allows for sexual
interactions that fall in line with one's identity. The accepted status
of role play within the fandom means that it's easier for people to
explore what is and what isn't comfortable, and to find the ways in
which sexuality interacts with gender for them. This, in part, helps
explain why those who utilize furry to explore gender are more likely to
role play as a character with a different sex than the one that they
have been assigned.

What this comes down to is that, if you identify as trans\*, you should
not be afraid to take the chance to explore your own sense of identity,
and if you don't, you should feel comfortable with those around you
doing so. Expressing one's gender identity through sexuality is a valid
way of exploring and experiencing social interaction, and that's a
conversation worth having with your partner or partners should the issue
come up!

### Social interaction

We've covered many aspects of social interaction so far, but there are a
few more that are worth considering. These fall into the camp of being
accepting of those around you. When you interact with someone, or
interact with others on the subject of that someone, you help to
reinforce (or to deny) their sense of identity, and it's important to
keep that in mind.

Pronouns
:   Pronouns such as 'he', 'she', 'they', or 'ey' are little signifiers
    that we can use to replace proper nouns so that we're not always
    repeating someone's name. In English, as in other languages, they
    are gendered. Respecting someone's pronoun choice goes beyond simple
    politeness, it helps to affirm their identity every time you speak
    about them. When in doubt, ask!

Identity
:   Although transgender might fit someone as an adjective, they might
    not necessarily feel comfortable identifying as trans; rather, they
    might simply identify as whatever gender identity they feel
    comfortable with, or as nothing at all. It's good to respect the
    wishes of the people you interact with. People might not appreciate
    being outed as trans\*, or having their previous expression
    brought up. Leave it up to that person to decide how much they wish
    to share and to say how they identify!

Names
:   Names are important as the unique signifiers that mean 'me'. In
    furry, we have a cavalier attitude towards names - it's easier to
    change names in the fandom than it is to legally change one's name
    outside of the fandom. Even so, if someone has changed their name,
    respect the fact that their old name might not be something that
    they are comfortable with and should be left out of conversation.

It all comes down to being respectful and to being open to having the
conversations that you need to have in order to make sure everyone is
happy.

### Glossary

Agender
:   Someone who identifies as agender identifies as not having any
    gender at all.

Cisgender
:   Cisgender is a term that is applied to someone whose gender identity
    aligns closely with their sex as assigned at birth, and commonly
    refers to individuals who do not identify as transgender.

Gender
:   Gender describes the complex interaction of physical
    characteristics, social role, expression, and identity that an
    individual experiences on a day-to-day life. Although physical sex
    may play a role in this characteristic of self, that might not
    necessarily be the case. Gender is often broken down into the
    categories of 'male' and 'female', though this is now commonly seen
    as a spectrum with varying levels of intensity, or even not
    applicable in many cases.

Genderfluid
:   Someone who identifies as genderfluid feels that their gender
    identity is not restricted to one gender over time and shifts from
    month to month or day to day.

Genderqueer
:   Someone who identifies as genderqueer feels that they do not fall
    into either the traditional breakdown of genders or the labels of
    cisgender or transgender.

Intersex
:   Intersex refers to a collection of biological factors that may lead
    to someone not falling within the standard, binary categories of
    'male' and 'female'. Someone who is intersex may have genetic
    differences that subvert the normal concept of sex (such as 47, XXX
    syndrome or Klinefelter syndrome) or may have issues with sex
    hormones (such as androgen insensitivity sydnrome). In some cases,
    there is confusion as to a child's gender at birth, and some doctors
    may suggest surgery to 'choose' a gender for an intersex child, a
    practice denounced as medically unethical.

Non-binary
:   Non-binary refers to the idea that a binary definition of gender
    (that is, male and female) does not describe the full reality of how
    gender is experienced. It can also refer to someone's identity
    (i.e.: identifying as not male and not female).

Sex
:   A physical characteristic of life that is determined by several
    factors, including genetics, hormones before birth and during
    puberty, and possible surgical intervention, that is commonly shown
    in primary or secondary sexual characteristics such as genitals,
    breasts, bone structure, fatty tissue deposits, and various
    differing signs in aging. Sex is commonly broken down into 'male'
    and 'female' (although, see the definition for intersex), and is
    often mistaken as being identical to gender due to the fact that
    many individuals experience identity congruent with these
    physical characteristics.

Transgender
:   Transgender is an umbrella term used to denote someone whose gender
    identity does not necessarily align with their physical sex, gender
    role in society, or perceived social gender. It encompasses more
    specific identities such as agender, genderqueer, genderfluid, and
    transsexual individuals, as well as, in some circumstances,
    cross-dressers and transvestites. To emphasize the umbrella nature
    of the term, it is sometimes written as 'trans\*'.

Transsexual
:   Someone who identifies as transsexual identifies as a gender
    incongruous with their physical or socially assigned sex. There is
    some confusion about the difference between 'transsexual'
    and 'transgender'. In general, transgender is the broader and more
    widely-accepted term, with 'transsexual' being deprecated as tied
    into the concept of gender issues as 'disorders', though several
    individuals still refer to themselves as transsexual people. In
    general, refer to someone with the label that *they* choose!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes and References

1.  <div id="ref1">

    </div>

    [Witnessing and
    Mirroring](http://adjectivespecies.com/2014/11/26/witnessing-and-mirroring/) -
    Makyo, [\[adjective\]\[species\]](http://adjectivespecies.com) (26
    November 2014) [↑](#deref1)
2.  <div id="ref2">

    </div>

    [The 2013 Furry Survey
    results](http://vis.adjectivespecies.com/furrysurvey/) - The Furry
    Survey (1 January 2014) [↑](#deref2)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

{% for post in site.categories.relationships limit:1 %}

### Current Version: {{ post.title }} ({{ post.date|date_to_string }})

<div class="version-content">

{{ post.content }}

</div>

{% endfor %}
